[Music]
hey guys how are you doing and you're
ready for your exam no yeah it was much
nicer at the end of August you know the
semester was just beginning and the
weather was so nice now it's winter time
in Berkeley which means like 60 degrees
55 so today is the review lecture okay
in the last few lectures I gave you an
overview from the kind of a theoretical
point of view of what this course is
about and in particular this last
chapter that we have studied and today I
would like to focus more on the
practical aspects over of it and
basically on the question what do you
need to know to do well on the final
exam okay so I'll go over the most
important points of the material which
will focus on on the final exam which
again will be on December 19th and I'm
not going to go over all the information
again everything is available on on
online here and also in this space I
will I will also have last minute office
hours or the day before on the 18th in
case you you know suddenly don't see the
difference between coral and divergence
and you panic it's just a 94 you can
come to see me on on 18th and we'll sort
it out I'll sort it out for you okay
also I want to tell you one more time
that the exam will be at first gym in
three different rooms okay and you will
the room is determined by your section
which bet is determined by who your GSI
is and your GS eyes have already
announced the room the rooms for for you
but you can find all this information
again here and here okay
but you should be aware of
where your exam room is it's important
that you are at the right place we don't
end up in a you know it's cursed gym so
it's big and now it's easy to get lost
so be sure you know which room you
should you should show up at ok any
questions about the organizational
aspects of the of the final ok good so
now let's talk about the material I
[Applause]
already said that this exam will focus
on the material after the second midterm
what we call the third season and but it
doesn't mean that you should forget what
happened in the first two seasons
meaning that certainly problems solving
all the problems will require skills
which you learn before you should not
forget all this stuff right especially
multiple integrals are a very important
part of of this of this material so I
think it's a good idea to go over that
old material perhaps not devote as much
time as the material of the last chapter
which we studied since the last exam but
you should probably review it
nonetheless any questions from this part
of the audience no ok now so I would
like to break it into the material so I
will only talk about the material since
the last exam but again don't take it as
meaning that you should not know
anything about what happened before you
should but the focus will be on this
material ok that's why I'm going over
this material now all right so the first
thing I would like to talk about is
integrals in this much in this part of
the course we have talked about
different kinds of integrals and I would
like to summarize again what those
integrals are and what kind of
information you need to be able to
compute them so the first thing I want
to focus is just the integrals
what kind of integrals well we integrate
over curves and we integrate over
surfaces so there are two types of
integrals first of all depending on the
dimension of the domain let me talk
first about the integrals over curves
over curves so here we have two types of
integrals also the type 1 integral is an
integral of a function so this is an
integral which looks like this
you have F D F where F is a function
over curve so a curve here could be over
could be a curve on the plane that is r2
or in space on the plane or in space but
the way we handle these integrals is
very similar now how do we compute such
an integral so to compute such an
integral the first step is to
parameterize your curve parameter is the
curve so which by the way was the very
first subject that we learned in this
course so this is a good example what I
mean when I say you know revisit review
the material from the previous chapters
because certainly to be able to do such
an integral you have to know how to
parameterize curves and that's something
we learned at the very beginning okay so
parametrizing parameterizing the curve
means
means introducing an auxiliary parameter
which we usually call tea but you may
call it something else if you like in
writing each of the coordinates as
functions of the subsidiary parameter so
you would have X as a function of this
parameter key Y is a function of this
parameter T and V as a function of this
parameter T that would be in the case
when the curve is in space if it's on
the plane it would only have X&Y of
course right and once you do that this
integral and then you have to say that T
what is the range for this video
parameter T and the range will be
between some numbers a and B so then
this integral will be equal to the
integral of F where instead of XY and V
you introduce you insert those three
functions F of T Y of T FD of right and
you integrate from A to B but in
addition you also have to insert a
factor which has to do with the arc
length of the curve and that would be
following F prime of T squared plus y
prime of T squared plus D prime of T
squared and finally DP and again if you
are on the plane you just don't have the
Z variable you just erase this button
you get the formula phone on the plane
now what does this represent this
represents mass over say a thin wire in
the shape of of this curve in the shape
of this curve if F is the density
function is mass density function
also remember that if F is equal to one
if F is equal to one in other words you
just you just have the square root this
integral represents simply the arc
length arc length on the curve so we
sent to grow this integral measures the
total mass or total length of this of
this object this curve okay that's what
this integral is about it's very easy to
distinguish this integral from the next
type of integral because you see that in
this integral you integrate functions
whereas the second type of integral you
integrate vector fields so in second
type you have an integral of a vector
field rather than function f with the
vector field so as such it has
components I in front of I you have fee
in front of J of Q and then you have a
third component R if this vector field
on the on in space if it's on the plane
again you only have two components okay
so vector field is a more than a
function it has three components in
space two components on the plane and
this integral can be also written as pdx
plus qdy plus rdz
this is the same it's the same it
because the dr here stands for DX I plus
dy J plus DZ K and so if you take the
dot product of this two you end up with
this formula so these are two different
ways to write a line integral of a
vector field either this way or that way
it's the same okay in the case of a over
line integral of a vector field there is
an additional complication which we
don't have for integrals of this type
integral of this type it's enough to
just write this
you have to specify the curve you have
to specify the function and that's it
but in the case of the line integral of
a vector field you have to you have to
specify additional piece of data so
which I kind of I want to emphasize here
you need our intuition of T of course
when I say you need to specify what I
really mean is that I need to specify it
in other words when I give you if I give
you problem compute this line integral I
have to tell you with respect to which
orientation okay if I'm if I don't tell
you it means that the problem is not
well posed unless you have to find I
left you know there's something said
which should enable you to find there in
tation in other words this is not
well-defined
if you just have the vector field and
the curve you have to also have
orientation on this curve what do I mean
by orientation a curve is going to be
look like this so goes from some point A
to point B and orientation means the
direction which way do we traverse this
curve so there are two possible
orientations here's one orientation and
here's another indication we can go from
A to B you can go from B to a and of
course the answer if you choose the
first orientation is going to be just
the negative of the answer if you use
choose the secondary invasion but it's a
different answer unless the integral is
just 0 you will get different answer
depending on which orientation you
choose sorry intention has to be
specified and you have to follow that
orientation so you have to be careful
when you set up such an integral to make
sure that you are computing it in the
right direction you're doing it the
integral orientation right in the right
way of course here I have drawn a curve
which has two endpoints
there are also curves which do not have
endpoints close curves
here's an example of a closed curve in
the case of a closed curve it also has
two orientation two orientations which
we usually call clockwise and
counterclockwise right so count
clockwise is this one there is also a
somewhat misleading terminology in the
book which is called positive
orientation which I prefer not to use
because it's positive it's an it's a
matter of convention right so so let's
just call it counterclockwise or
clockwise in the book counter clockwise
is also called positive but I think it's
it is potential for for misunderstanding
if you use that terminology so let's
just stick to clockwise counter
clockwise I think it's fairly it's very
self-explanatory okay now let's say
let's suppose you have this you have to
chose infection orientation what will be
what will this is how to compute this
integral so there you use again
parameterization like this but now it's
important to make sure that your
orientation that you've chosen is agrees
with variant ation on the exhilerated
key this key is actually it just belongs
to the one dimensional space to the line
and the line is very entered because
points on the line correspond to numbers
the numbers are oriented we can say
which number is bigger between any two
numbers so when we write it like this it
means that we identify the curve with
the interval from A to B and the
interval from A to B is always oriented
from A to B like this right so let's
suppose that under this permit ization
you choose there in tation like this so
it goes from this point to this point
and this point is T equal a and this
point is equal B okay let's suppose that
in this case this integral
[Applause]
is computed as an integral from A to B
of P X prime P DT well let's just write
like this plus Q y prime plus R Z Z
prime but here is a here's a possible
trick question let's suppose I will ask
you on the exam to compute such a line
integral where the curve is oriented in
a different way okay so if you don't pay
attention you would say okay that's just
you would find your permit ization where
again let's say tu equal a corresponds
to this and a equal B corresponds to
this let's suppose and then you if you
don't pay attention to this stuff to the
orientation you might want to write it
again like this that would be wrong
you see because you have to make sure
that with respect to the orientation
which you are told to use the the permit
ization is such that you know the lowest
one is the initial point the lowest
value a is the initial point and the
large largest value B is corresponds to
the end point in this picture that's the
case and that's why we end up with this
integral from A to B then in other words
the integral that I got with respect to
T has this orientation which comes from
the annotation of the curve but if there
is a ssin is like this you have to go
from T equal B to equal a right because
you have to go from this point to this
point this point corresponds to T equal
B this corresponds to te Kawai that's
why so in this case then you should
write it as from B to a and the same
thing then of course what is integral
from B to a integral from B to a is the
same as negative integral from A to B so
you will actually end up with minus this
integral okay that
here ask me if it's not clear so this is
this is a subtle point which you have to
you have to remember now what does this
what does this integral represent
interpretation of this integral is that
it represents work done by force this is
work done by force by force F along C
from the point A to the point B you see
from this for if you think about this
interpretation it's a it becomes more it
becomes more clear why there is a sign
because when you talk about the work
done by force the force is moving an
object or it may be resisting a movement
of the object right and and so it's
important if where you go from A to B or
from B to a if the force let's say the
force let's say the force is comes from
the wind and the wind is blowing this
way and so the wind is carrying me this
way so the the wind does does perform
certain amount of work right and this
work is positive but what if the wind is
blowing this way but I'm still I still
insist on going there okay because I'm
stubborn so I I go against the wind
so in that case ice I prefer I do work
not the wind and so the wind is
resisting me therefore the work of the
wind is negative you see so it's
important to know not just the
trajectory of the object but but it's
also important the you know whether the
relative position of the force and the
under trajectory in other words there in
tation of the trajectory relative to the
direction of the vector field you see so
that so it becomes more clear that if I
go this way if I go this way against the
wind it's a negative work if I go this
way with the wind it would be positive
okay you have a question that's right
that's right when I write it like this
so the question is about this PQ R in
this formula I spelled it out I wrote F
as of f is a function of XYZ but now XYZ
have become functions of T so I
substitute these three functions into f
likewise in this formula I didn't write
it just to save time but what I mean by
this is and the same same similar form
for Q&A
Qi now okay so the intention is
important it causes change of
orientation results in the change in the
appearance of a sign okay so that's that
pretty much all about the set up of
integrals for curves so next we move on
to integrals over surfaces integrals
over surfaces
so what do we need to know here here
again there are two types of integrals
that we are interested in and there is a
lot of similarity between the first type
for surfaces and the first type for
curves and second type of service
systems and second types of curves
so the first integrals of the first type
over surfaces are integrals of functions
so here again F is a function in this
case you have a surface M and it is
embedded in r3
you could also have a surface embedded
in our tool that would be just a region
on the plane like this right but that so
that's integrating over such regions was
the subject of the earlier chapter of
the course chapter 15
it's a just usual double integrals so
here the novelty is when you look at
surfaces in r3 which do not fit in r2
which cannot sit in a plane but only fit
in a three-dimensional space like us
here or part of a sphere right so what
I'm talking about is something like this
like a cap a cap like this that's would
be M so what what does how do i compute
this again to compute I have to
parameterize my surface parameterize
because it is now two-dimensional I have
to use two auxiliary parameters which we
usually call U and V and so we write X
is some function of U and V Y some
function of U and V Z is a function of U
and V where u and V run over points of
some domain already on a plane so what
I'm doing is that I'm trying to identify
a curved surface like this like this M
with a flat surface like this which I
call D so each point here would
correspond to a point here and it's a
one-to-one correspondence that's what
this parameterization means once you
have this privatization you have a
formula for project integral
to write this formula I will use the
following notation alcohol R of U V the
vector field which is obtained from this
permutation by interpreting each of the
three functions x y and z as components
over the other three vector so you'll
have X of U VI plus y of UV j plus Z of
UV okay this is vector R and so two I
can differentiate this vector for
example R sub u will simply mean X sub u
times I plus y sub u times J plus Z sub
u times K so again this stands for
partial derivative of X with respect to
u these are partial derivative partial
derivatives with respect to U so this is
a this is this is another example of
something which we use in this part of
the course we're building on some
material that we learned before because
of course we learned partial derivatives
earlier right before the second exam so
the gates so again you have to know how
for example how to compute partial
derivatives without knowing how to
compute partial derivatives you would
not be able to compute such integrals
once okay so once we have this we also
have R sub R sub V defined in a similar
way you just put derivatives respect to
V instead of U then the formula is the
following ah
I actually made them I only drew one
sign of integration I should have drawn
to two signs of integration but double
integrals we draw two signs
well it's not a big deal I will not
deduct points for this since I've made
the same mistake I'll go easy on you if
you put a 1 integration sign instead of
2 for double integrals but for triple
integrals you should put more than 1
for double integral suburbia I'll be
lenient on double integrals in terms of
communion interval science you put okay
let me put two signs here though so
integral over this mmm you'll be able to
write as a double integral over D where
here you will put F where again you put
X of UV Y of UV and V of UV and then you
will put R sub u across R sub V this is
the cross product again something we
learned before and then you take the
magnitude of this vector V a V a is the
usual measure of integration on on the
UV plane so this term ru cross RV is
just like this term which you have for
integrals of functions over over curves
the first type of integral it's the
analog it's the end look of that that
that ru cross RV absolute value is
analog of this okay so now the question
really becomes how do you parameterize
it once you parameterize it once you
parameterize it it's very easy because
you just need to compute the derivatives
and you take the cross product and you
end up with with just an ordinary double
integral but the question is how do you
how do you compute this so well there
are there are at least two special cases
which you should know the first special
case is when your your surface is part
of graph it's part of graph of the graph
of a function in this case the formula
is simplified and in fact it's a good
idea to remember to remember this
formula but you will actually have a
cheat sheet so you might as well you can
just write it on the cheat sheet you
don't have to remember
okay so special case the first special
case is when when the curve on the
surface M is part of the graph of some
function G of X Y so in this case what
we can do is we can just say that X is U
Y is V and V is G of UV okay or we can
just stop pretending that you and V are
two separately are two additional
auxiliary variables and just call them
what they are I mean let's just call
this f zero variables x and y so then
the permit ization will be in terms of x
and y and we'll have x is x y is y and z
is G of X Y so in this case actually you
can compute this cross-product
and this has been done I I did it in
class I wrote this formula class your
computation is explained in the book you
must have done it many times on homework
so you might as well just remember this
formula and formulate like this it's
minus G GD X minus DG g y so this is I
this is J plus K if I remember it
correctly please correct me if I'm wrong
I think it's correct this formula you
just get by applying by applying that
general formula in this particular case
it's just that when you compute the
cross product so you have to compute
this you know the determinant of a 3x3
matrix it's just that the matrix becomes
very simple and it simplify so it's easy
to compute I'm sorry
that's right I did not close the
parentheses for which I apologize okay
no please bitch tell me because we want
our worldwide audience to see only the
correct only correct formulas so okay
and now if you have this you can compute
it it's a it's it's magnitude very
easily and so it's just going to be the
sum square root of the sum of squares of
this component so it's like this okay so
we actually have not just that magnitude
but we actually have a formula for the
cross product which I will use in a
minute okay so that's the first special
case there is a second special case when
your surface is part of sphere the
second special case is M it's part of
the sphere of the sphere of some radius
let's call this radius R so this this
radius R is just a number so so you got
a sphere which is of this radius and
your M could be just the entire sphere
could be the entire sphere okay or it
could be Hemisphere or it could be part
of the sphere which is within confined
within a cone like an ice-cream cone
right and that's just that's just a
surface of the ice cream so in each of
these in each of these cases a good way
to parameterize such
such surface is to use spherical
coordinates spherical coordinates we
learned before spherical coordinates
spherical coordinates give us an
alternative coordinate system for the
entire three-dimensional space and
you've got three coordinates we've got
Rho Phi and theta but now we are on a
sphere we are on the sphere of radius R
so from the point of view of critical
coordinate this coordinate Rho is fixed
roll the coordinate of special codes is
equal to R right but we still have two
remaining spherical coordinates which we
can use to parameterize our surface
which is good because surface is
two-dimensional so it requires two
independent coordinates and Phi and
theta give us these two coordinates so
in other words u and V here are Phi and
theta for example if it's the entire
sphere you will have theta going from 0
to 2 pi and Phi going from 0 to PI which
is the full range of Phi and theta if
it's the upper hemisphere again theta
will go from 0 to 2 pi and Phi will go
from 0 to PI over 2 and here theta is
from 0 to 2 pi and Phi well Phi depends
how much ice cream you get so it's in
your interest to have it as large as
possible I guess although it becomes
more difficult to hold it so let's just
settle on the middle middle ground PI
over 4 ok so that's how you prime it
this example of permit ization and now
in this in this case there is a formula
also for there is a formula for let me
erase this so let's just I write the
formula for our u cross RV but now we
don't have U and V we have Phi and theta
and so our five cross
our theta in this case and I'll just
write the formula for the magnitude is
actually what you would expect it to be
it's exactly the formula for the
Jacobian except that you have to set Rho
equals R in here since R squared times
sine Phi you know question right so the
question is about the cone how do I
measure Phi Phi is measured from the
z-axis right so 0 2 PI over 4 would be
this kind of range yeah works although I
have to say in this picture it looks a
little bit less than PI over 4 I don't
want to short change you ice cream but
it is just an approximate an approximate
picture not the best day to eat ice
cream in Berkeley though perhaps earlier
in the semester would have been more
appropriate okay so that's the formula
for this and let's go back to this
double integral so that's all you need
you need this guy you need your function
where you stick those expressions for
coming from your permutation and then
you end up with a simple double integral
so you compute it what is the
interpretation of this what is the
meaning of this the meaning just like in
the case of type 1 integrals for curves
is that it represents something that has
to do with the area or mass it's
something like when you average density
over your surface so the typical example
is that this is represent
math of say aluminum foil in the shape
of M where F this function f which
appears in that integral F is the mass
density function density function now it
doesn't have to be mass it could be any
quantity which you can measure which can
have a density for instance charge this
foil could be charged but in a in a
complicated way so that some parts are
more charge than others so you have to
integrate you have to average them out
and so you can have F may be the charge
density function not natural mass
density function so then you will be
calculating total charge by the way if
it is mass you can also talk about about
the momenta of the mass which means that
you would be multiplying in the center
under this integral F by X X or Y or Z
right so you can also find the center of
mass for for this membrane for this
surface so if somebody if the question
is phrased in the following way find the
charge of aluminum foil in shape of
such-and-such surface if the charge
density function is such-and-such
function then you immediately know that
you have to do this integral okay so
that's the interval the first kind or
type 1 integral over surfaces and next
we go to type 2 integrals type 2
integrals are integrals of vector fields
in this case
in this case we are given a vector field
F given a vector field and we are
computing this which is oftentimes
called sometimes called surface integral
of a vector field but oftentimes it's
also called flux flux of air across em
so the word flux if you see the word
flux it refers to the integral of the
second type and I explain what it means
it means the flow the rate of flow of
for example over of a fluid through this
membrane if F is the velocity vector
field so this integral actually was
defined originally but as its follows we
we said that we have to take the dot
product of F with with the unit normal
vector field along along M then this
will be a function and we take its
integral as a type 1 integral so this
definition already makes it makes clear
that we need orientation we need to a
choice of n
so just like the integrals of second
type for curves are not really well
defined if you just specify vector field
and the surface integrals of the second
type are also not well defined if you
just page by vector field and surface
you have to specify orientation on your
surface so it's exactly the same we need
that in tation and the orientation
should be given to you if it's if you
have to solve a problem variant ation if
if you give if you are given a problem
where you have to compute the flux of
electric field across a given surface
the problem has to say what is the
orientation over there should be a way
to find which orientation it's supposed
to be okay now again there are two
different types of aren t there took
different orientations in case the
surface it is orientable but of course
will we'll be dealing with the rentable
surfaces I explained to your mobile Mugu
strip remember member strip is an
example of a surface which is not
orientable but we will be working with
orientable surfaces so an Aryan pool
surface will have two different types
two different inpatients which they will
differ by a sign so how do you find out
which one which are in tation to use so
let me first of all rewrite this to make
it computable as a double integral
so again I'm assuming that my surface is
parameterised in this way by this
functions in U and V okay and in this
case this double integral will be
written as follows so the double in
double integral over this domain D to
have there and then here you'll have F
what are you cross RV I mean in
principle you could try to compute this
integral by using this M and there are
different ways there are different ways
to try to find this normal vector okay a
unit normal vector so you could actually
apply this formula and and then compute
this integral as a type 1 integral you
could compute as a type 1 integral but I
think I see jet I strongly suggest that
you use it as you use this formula for
it okay this because the point is that
it's easy there are many ways to find a
normal vector for instance you know we
talked about normal vectors for graphs
the function functions for example but
what you need to do after this you have
to first of all normalize it you have to
get a normal vector of unit length let's
normalize it and then in addition you
will have to compute the DS which itself
is a rather complicated task right you
have to compute the dss which we here
compute is the magnitude of ru cross RV
the nice thing about this formula is
that this formula is obtained from this
formula where instead of n you take this
ru cross RV which you normalize by
dividing by its magnitude so what
happens is that there is some
consolation this norm this magnitude
gets cancelled by the same magnitude in
the in the denominator so the formula
actually simplifies that's why I think
that
it's better this one with nicer so you
it's easier to get confused if you use a
different type of formal I mean you can
do it at your own risk
if you know if you like if you know they
mean but I'm just I just think that this
is the best way to do it
in the framework for the kind of
problems that we are dealing with here
okay so but so here's the formula but
how do you see if this is the right
answer and notice negative you see so
this is this is a big question how to
see to see that you get the right
orientation in this form ah
in other words you could have you could
have a problem say where you are asked
where you are asked to compute to use
their intention to compute with respect
to the orientation upward orientation so
let's say you're asked to use that for
Darien tation how do you know that this
formula gives you the
integral with the upward orientation and
not the downward orientation for example
right so first of all what what do we
mean by upward orientation it means that
you have to choose n of the for
something times I plus something times J
where this doesn't matter plus something
which is positive x ki this is upward
and if I put less than zero here it will
be downward so that's the terminology
upward vector is a vector whose K
component or Z component is positive and
downward vector is a vector which has a
negativity component okay so let's say
you're asked to compute the integral
over over surface assuming the upward
orientation and you have this formula
and the natural question is that this
form will give me the upper Darien
tation or gives me downward are in cage
we have to check that because if it does
give me the upward orientation I will
get the right answer if it gives me
downward orientation then I would get
minus sign I will get negative of the
right answers also it means I will get
the wrong answer right if I get the
wrong answer it means that I don't get
the full score on this problem right so
how do you see that well here is an
example let's look at some special cases
where this actually can be computed more
explicitly and the first case is that if
the case when M is part of this of the
graph so for example let's look at the
case when example M is part of the graph
of the function G of X Y in this case we
have already computed RG rx cross RV ry
it is written on this formula this is rx
cross ry so let me let me just copy this
formula here
so this formula in this formula the
coefficient in front of I and condition
front of G depends on on the on this
function that you have of which you are
you know which gives you this graph
right so this this coefficients depend
but this coefficient is always equal to
one so this is this coefficient is one
so it's positive and so that means that
if you are using this formula for rx
cross ry right if you are using this
formula for rx cross ry then you are
getting orientation or you're computing
this formula is computing the integral
with respect to the upward orientation
you see so this is the important point
that a priori it could be this gives you
a normal vector not normalized not unit
but it gives you a normal vector and and
by looking at this vector you can find
out with respect to which orientation
you are now computing and then you have
to match that with what you are asked to
do in this case our X cross ry so you
have to look more closely at this vector
and see what does it look like all the
tablet in this particular case the is
the simplest information we can infer
that this vector is the fact that
coefficient front of key is 1 so it is
upward it's always upward so now you
match it's your case so what am I asked
to do I'm asked to do a double integral
surface integral with respect to the
upward orientation
oh it's violent ation upward yesterday
so this is the right formula F dot rx
cross ry is the right form is the right
form if there in for for up for
upward orientation but what if I want to
trip you and I ask you and I ask you is
it on the test I ask you to compute the
double integral compute the surface
integral
who is it back to the downward
orientation if you don't pay attention
if you just you have copied this formula
on your cheat on your cheat sheet right
and you've copied this form on your
cheat sheet and so you think you're in
good shape you just apply that formula
and you get an answer but you get the
wrong answer
because you did not pay attention to
what would ask you were asked to compute
with respect to downward orientation but
you computer to respect to the upward
orientation just simply because the
formal you are using always gives you
upward but I have the right to ask you
to compute respect to downward
orientation
you know both integrals I'm it makes
sense it's much it's it's my right my
prerogative in fact to ask you to define
any to ask you to compute with respect
to any orientation that I like so in
that case you have to be clever and you
have to put a minus sign so this is the
right formula this is for downward
integer because putting this minus sign
you can interpret it as putting it mine
putting a minus sign in front of rx
cross ry if I put it in front of rx
cross ry I will get plus here plus here
and most important I get minus one here
if I get minus one here I got annotation
vector which is downward so that matches
what I'm asked to do right to do the
downward orientation that's why this is
the correct formula this clear ask me
ask me quite okay all right
right I'll give another example in a
minute
for when it's not a porter downward very
good what if the coefficient was zero so
okay in this case it's not it never
happens right because in which case is
just so with like this so so here's an
here's in the next level of trick
question which is that suppose it's some
ru cross RV okay but for some other und
and suppose it happens that the
component of the K vector is zero right
in this case I should not be asking you
to computer respect to upwards or
downwards orientation because if it has
if it's K component is zero it means
it's parallel to the XY plane right so
it's neither upward nor downward and
saying that computer respect to upward
orientation would be misleading in or
ambiguous it will not give you an
information because not neither of the
two vectors is upward or downward right
so in this case you actually have to use
another way to describe it okay so what
are other ways to say we have to
describe in words you know the possible
the two possibilities you have to be
able to distinguish between them if the
K component is nonzero you can
distinguish between the sine of K right
you can say it was a positive sign or
negative sign but if it is zero for
example you can talk about the sign of
the click of the coefficient in front of
J even in this case here's another trick
question I could ask instead of saying
compute this integral even in this case
when it's part of a graph instead of
saying it's the upward or downward I
could say computed with respect to the
orientation which is to the left okay so
what does it mean what should you do if
you see that don't panic
it's a if you're a if you experience a
ssin is described in terms of left right
it means we are talking about the
y-coordinate right instead of the z
coordinate which will decay and i get
the y coordinate which would be
right so to the left would mean that the
coefficient is negative and to the right
would mean that the coefficient in front
of J is positive right now of course in
this case it's not clear it depends on
the function G sometimes just the fact
that T is the minus sign here doesn't
mean anything because the function could
be negative so then the total sign would
be positive and so on right but in the
particular example which you are
computing you should be able to see if
it's positive or negative over that
range you see so what I'm saying is what
you're interested in is just the piece
of the of the graph so you are working
with a particular domain G in UV and you
have to see whether over this domain
certain coefficient is positive or
negative right
that's all it and for example suppose
you find that ru cross RV let me now
switch to the more general setting where
you actually have coordinates U and V
and it's not necessarily graph of a
function but with some other more
general surface so you could have ru
cross RV is equal to some you know some
a of UV I plus V of UV J plus C of UV K
this is what you will compute by taking
by taking these partials and taking the
cross product so you'll get three
functions and then you just have to look
closely what do they look like well
let's say this is u squared plus V
squared okay so okay so then it's not 1
but it's going to be positive well the
only point where it will not would not
be positive would be 0 0 so let's
suppose that your domain does not
include point 0 0 so then it's always
positive if you look if you see that you
know that the coefficient front of J is
positive which means that the intension
vector is pointing to the right
right because because this is what this
is X well of course when we say when we
say that it's all relative to how we
organize our coordinate system what do
we mean by left and right right there is
a way which we kind of used to which
would be like X goes this way and Y goes
this way and this is a Z right so so in
this case to the right means that it's a
positive number in front of J to the
left means it's a negative number in
front of J so in this case is going to
be a vector not necessarily like this
but maybe like this so this is to the
right and for the left is this way
is that clear there is another way to
describe orientation by using the word
outward and inward so usually this is
often used for spheres or for closed
domains okay so that's another way and
that should be also pretty
self-explanatory so at the end of the
day you have to compute the formula by
using ru cross RV but the bottom line is
what you get is either the correct
answer or either the answer which if you
put in this if you stick in here you get
the correct answer or it's negative so
it becomes fine-tuning issue is it
correct or so they put a minus sign so
then you match the description of Darien
tation which is given in words upward
downward left right to what you got and
usually it should be fairly easy to see
and then that's how you see whether you
got the right answer so you use that
formula without any modification or you
put a negative sign that's all it is
okay any questions yes
right so what if the sign changes if the
sign chain of course then the
description would not be correct
I mean well-defined right so the
description should besides that if it
says to the right it means that that
coefficient should stay positive or
negative whatever right okay all right
so so that's about the set up of the
integrals and now I want to say a few
words about the connection between
different integrals these are the
formulas which we've learned so this is
two formulas so we're essentially we
have essentially learned three different
formulas we have the fundamental theorem
of line for line integrals we have
Stokes formula
and then we have divergence here Wow
okay so now I have explained oh also
greens theorem is a special case of this
when M is really belongs to the plane
it's a special case of this so that's
why I didn't single it out ok so I
already explained the kind of the
general theory behind this and how you
can you can think of all of these
formulas as special cases of one and
only formula what I would like to focus
now is the practical aspects of this how
you can you apply these formulas to
computing integrals of the type which we
have just discussed so here I would like
to emphasize first of all the following
aspect of this formulas that in this
formulas always there is a trade-off
between the sort of a boundary sort of a
geometric boundary of a domain and a
sort of derivative of the object that
you are integrating the trade-off
on the left it's a general domain of
integration but the integrand is special
in the first formula you're computing on
the line integrals of vector fields of
this form a gradient the conservative
vector fields in this formula introduced
only of coral of something which is a
curl of another vector field here you
compute a function which is divergence
of from vector field so they're kind of
derivative of other objects but the
domains are most general most general
curve most general surface most general
three-dimensional solid on the other
hand on the right hand side you have the
most general object general function
here general vector field here also
general vector field but you're
integrating over domains which are kind
of derivatives of the domains on the
left hand side where in the geometric
world the relative means boundary so
this is a very important point to
remember when you decide which formula
is appropriate for this of that exercise
so these are that computation so on the
right hand side you've got general
integrand but special domain namely
boundary domain is the riveters
derivative here is bounded
okay so the most so so don't try to use
the formula where for example we're just
on these grounds you can rule it out
in other words or don't use it in a
straightforward way use it in a more
creative way you see so so let me give
you just two examples of how these
formulas could be used for example one
so let's suppose you have you're asked
to compute the line integral of a vector
field but the curve the curve over which
you have to compute is very complicated
so this is the first indication that we
should replace the domain of integration
okay so in this case let's say you're
asked to compute this
so the clever thing to do is to replace
this domain by this this is curve by
this curve which has the same endpoint
right and then you can argue that this
line integral is equal to so let's call
it c1 and let's call this C to this line
integral is equal to 0 over c2 of F PR -
plus the into double integral of curl F
G s where you integrate over the
interior of the comic you see you can
use this formula let's call it V or M
let's go down ok
so the reason is the following that if
you take this to the left hand side you
will get negative C - right I'm just -
I'm writing it like this because I
prefer to say this is equal to this plus
something but I could put this integral
to the left with minus sign which means
I'm integrating over c1 minus c2 and
then you have to see that this is the
boundary of em c1 minus c2 would be
going with this orientation and I would
the boundary of M now if if I do if I do
it like this there is a there is this
bring brings up another issue which is
the issue of orientation in this formula
so I'm I'm using the formula but in both
cases I have integrals which depend on
orientation and we have this rule for
orientations okay which which we discuss
already many times so orientation on the
left and on the right have to match in
this way where if you walk on boundary
surfaces in your left so the way I did
it right now would mean that their
intention on this surface would have to
go that way okay so here it will be the
surface where orientation is going to
through the blackboard the usual
orientation which with you're normally
consider would be this orientation
towards us right and that sterian tation
which we would get with counterclockwise
but here I have chosen the intention
which goes clockwise well because I also
put minus c2 so a reverse this and so
this will be there in tation with an
impatient I pull it away from us not
toward us but away from us because if
somebody would be walking if their feet
are on the blackboard but their head
points that way so they'll be walking in
that in that classroom don't be like
spider-man and they will be and they
will be walking also on like this
bizarro world which is behind this
blackboard which we don't even know
what's going on over there right
but that person would be walking like
this the surface would be on their left
right so normally if we if I were to
walk like this I would have to walk
counterclockwise for the surface to be
on my left right so if I wanted to have
orientation here towards us I would have
to for this form out to be true I would
have to choose a vegetarian tation but
so I'm putting sort of several things
into this example because I'm out of
time essentially but I'm trying to sort
of pack a lot of information into this
one example so you should really look at
it more carefully and at different
aspects of this okay their intentions
have to be compatible and there is one
more thing which I'm doing here which is
the time replacing a complicated path
I and an easy pass a simple path and the
trade-off is that this guy is equal to
this one but there is a price to pay and
the price is the double integral over
this membrane over this sort of a film
think of it it's sort of like a film
that you get from from soap it's like a
frame and there is some kind of soap so
you have to integrate over that the curl
the best possible scenario where this
works is one curly 0if currently here
there is no price to pay and in fact
this complicated integral with this
complicated curve is equal is just
straight equal to the integral here but
sometimes it's not zero sometimes it's
not zero but it could be very simple so
it's not such a big price to pay
sometimes you see you see I mean so you
have to you have to be care you have to
see different different options the
different options that you have so this
is one example where I'm utilizing
formal number two and let me give you
one more example which is kind of
similar but for formal number three
[Applause]
so maybe I should I should emphasize
here that in this formulas orientations
have to be compatible have to be
compatible this is important I'm not
going to explain it one more time
because we spend a lot of time talking
about this and previous to a few lecture
so example number two example number two
you can a kind of a similar trade-off
but where you have to compute a double
integral so let's say you have this
upper hemisphere and then you also have
this disk at the base of this upper
hemisphere and together they form the
boundary of the upper half of this bowl
so let's call this B upper half of a
bowl so then the last formula would tell
you that the integral of divergence of
some vector field E over this B is equal
to the index through this surface to
through the boundary and the boundary
now consists of two things let's call
this m1 and let's call this M 2 so the
formula then will be that it into a
double integral over m1 plus double
integral over m 2
but I have to say with respect to which
orientation and the rule in the
divergence theorem is that Darien tation
is outward which here would mean like
this and here would mean like this here
it's outward actually is upward on the
top part and on the bottom outward is
actually downward but both the both are
outward so that's what I mean here and
here so how can we utilize this formula
for example what you can do is you can
express this as the difference between
this and this you see so this way you
can express a complicated integral over
something very curved the sphere or
upper Hemisphere in terms of two flat
integrals one of them is over
three-dimensional solid which actually
may be quite simple depending on what I
made a mistake like this it could
actually be zero this divergence it
could be zero so then this actually
drops out and then you can express this
guy as negative of this guy right or
even if it's nonzero it could be
something very simple like one function
one or something so then it's easy to
compute and this one is certainly easy
to compute easier to compute than this
one because it's an integral over a flat
region so you have it straight off again
similar to the trade-off discussed in
the previous example between an integral
over one part of the boundary and the
integral over the other part of the
boundary with the surplus or price to
pay coming from the integral of the
divergence so these are very typical
examples of kind of things that you need
to know to be able to apply this formula
okay so so here's what we're going to do
now I'm going to stop and we're going to
do course evaluations just take a few
minutes okay come on guys come on over
so we'll start distributing them and
we'll just take a few minutes and after
that after we're done with course
evaluations
I'll be here for for office hours and so
you can ask me questions about anything
well related to the core
okay